Propose ADR to formalise the Accredited/Training provider relationships (#4610)
DFE-Digital/publish-teacher-training: guides/adr/0012-formalize-accredited-provider-relationships.md

# 12. Formalize Accredited Provider relationships

Date: 23/10/24

## Status

Proposal

## Context

We have a database table `provider` that has an implicit self-join relationship based on another column `accrediting_provider`.

The relationship that currently exists is unconventional with respect to a normalised relational database.

> Making the relationship more conventional will allow us to query, validate and enforce the realtionships easily and will reduce the uncertainty about the nature of this relationship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making the relationship more conventional will allow us to query, validate and enforce the relationships easily and will reduce the uncertainty about the nature of this relationship.
```

### Misuse of the existing relationships

> We have seen Accredited provider relationships that exist solely for organisational reasons. This happens when Accredited provider A1 is an accredited provider for provider A2 but there is no expectation or intention for A1 to be the accredited provdier for courses run by A2. This feels like an abuse of the accredited provider association.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have seen Accredited provider relationships that exist solely for organisational reasons. This happens when Accredited provider A1 is an accredited provider for provider A2 but there is no expectation or intention for A1 to be the accredited provider for courses run by A2. This feels like an abuse of the accredited provider association.
```

### Definitions

 - A Training Provider
     * A provider that runs training courses directly.
     * |or|
     * A provider that has an subordinate assocation to another provider (accredited).
 - An Accredited Provider

>      * A provider that has an authoratative assocation to another provider (training).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * A provider that has an authoratative association to another provider (training).
```

### Training Provider -> Accredited Provider association

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
TrainingProvider --> Enrichments --> AccreditedProvider;
```

### Course -> Accredited Provider association
```mermaid
flowchart LR;
TrainingProvider --> Course --> AccreditedProvider;
```

## Options

### 1. Leave the relationships as they are

A training provider stores their accredited provider relationships in a serialized json column called `accredited_provider_enrichments`. The primary key is stored as a property in this serialized string. This columns is of type `jsonb` but the json type of the value is `string`, not `object` using a key that is outdated and misleading `'UcasProviderCode'`.

```
manage_courses_backend_development=# select jsonb_typeof(accrediting_provider_enrichments) from provider limit 1;
 jsonb_typeof
--------------
 string
(1 row)
```

This requires us to pattern match the string to find a training providers accredited provider associations. We cannot coerce the value to a jsonb object (array) because of the quote escaping in the stored string.

#### Pros

- No effort expended and other work can be prioritised

#### Cons

- Consuses new developers

> - Leaves the data in an under contrained state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Leaves the data in an under constrained state
```

- Inefficient methods for querying entity relationships

### 2. Create typical self-join has_many through pivot table relationship

To be filled out
```ruby
 # app/models/provider.rb

  has_many :accredited_accreditations,
           class_name: 'ProviderAccreditation',
           foreign_key: :training_provider_id

  has_many :training_accreditations,
           class_name: 'ProviderAccreditation',
           foreign_key: :accredited_provider_id

  has_many :accredited_providers,
           through: :accredited_accreditations,
           source: :accredited_provider,
           class_name: 'Provider'

  has_many :training_providers,
           through: :training_accreditations,
           source: :training_provider,
           class_name: 'Provider'
```

#### Pros

- Query the training provider / accredited provider relationships through typical relational associations
- Index the columns used to make these queries.
- More formally distinguish accredited and accrediting providers.
- Database validations (if desired) on which accredited providers can accredit which courses.

> - Opportunity to clarify definintions and understand how we are using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Opportunity to clarify definitions and understand how we are using them.
```

# 12. Formalize Accredited Provider relationships

Date: 23/10/24

## Status

Proposal

## Context

### Evolving provider relationships
The structural and conceptual relationships among and between providers and users has changed in many ways since this codebase was started.[[1]]

> Providers have always had a relationship between one another in the form of course accreditation. More recently, this relationship has been extended to delegating this accreditation.

Reviewer 2: For clarity, DfE accredits providers, and these accredited providers ratify courses published by their training (a.k.a. lead) partners.

Accredited providers cannot delegate their accreditation to training partners.

We have Accredited provider relationships that exist solely for organisational reasons. This happens when: 

> | Provider | Is accredited? | Is accredited by |

Reviewer 2: `Is accredited by` should be `Is ratified by`.

| ---      | ---            | ---              |
| A        | Yes            | -                |
| B        | Yes            | A                |
| C        | No             | B                |

> | Provider | Is accredited? | "Is accredited by" | asdf | Who ratifies their courses? |

Reviewer 2: `Is accredited by` is incorrect since this is what DfE does. It's more accurate to say `Is ratified by`.

Author: This is describing a direct relationship between two providers, not the relationship through a course.

Example: 
https://github.com/DFE-Digital/publish-teacher-training/pull/4589/files
https://github.com/DFE-Digital/publish-teacher-training/blob/b7fcf16c39e087706d2b076c3515c7a946126a45/db/data/20241011081455_update_accredited_providers.rb
Question:
- Which is the ratifying provider of the courses run by Provider B and Provider C?

This feels like an abuse of the accredited provider association, or a mislabelling of the relationship.

### Unconventional entity associations

We have a database table `provider` that has an implicit self-join relationship based on another column `accrediting_provider`.
The association exists through a column called `accredited_provider_enrichments`.

The relationship that currently exists is unconventional with respect to a normalised relational database.

This is explained more in [Option 1](#1.-leave-the-relationships-as-they-are).

### Organisations

Publish used to employ a system of 'Organisations'. A number of Providers would be grouped by all being a member of an organisation. 
Users would also be members of the organisation. This architecture has been abandoned but there are still remnants of this system in the codebase.

> ### Definitions

Reviewer 2: You could use this design history for definitions of different providers:

https://becoming-a-teacher.design-history.education.gov.uk/becoming-a-teacher/understanding-the-relationships-between-organisations-delivering-initial-teacher-training/

>  - A Training Provider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - A Training Partner
```

     * A provider that runs training courses directly.
     * |or|
     * A provider that has an subordinate assocation to another provider (accredited).
 - An Accredited Provider
     * A provider that has an authoritative association to another provider (training).

>  - Accrediting Provider
>      * A provider that accredits one or more courses on behalf of one or more training provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - Accredited Provider
     * A provider that ratifies one or more courses for training partners.
```

 - An Accredited Provider Relationship
     * A directional association between an accredited provider and another provider.

>  - Lead partner

Reviewer 2: Lead partner is a term used when accredited providers lost their accreditation. 

We previously had 'Lead schools,' which were logical groupings of schools with one designated as the administrator, hence 'lead school'. 

Instead of creating a new category for the accredited providers that lost accreditation, they were merged with the school grouping and called 'lead partners'.

In the UI, we use 'training partner' not least because they partner with accredited providers to deliver training. i.e., it's a more meaningful term.

Author: I just mean to say we haven't updated the terminology in the codebase from Lead school to Lead partner

      accredited_provider = recruitment_cycle.providers.find_by(provider_code:)

      if accredited_provider.present? && item.invalid?
        message = "^Reduce the word count for #{accredited_provider.provider_name}"
        errors.add :accredited_bodies, message
      end
    end
  end

  def accredited_provider_codes
    accrediting_provider_enrichments&.map(&:UcasProviderCode) || []
  end

    ...

class Organisation < ApplicationRecord
  has_many :organisation_users

  has_many :users, through: :organisation_users

  has_and_belongs_to_many :providers

    ...

class Course < ApplicationRecord

  def accrediting_provider_description
    return if accrediting_provider.blank?
    return if provider.accrediting_provider_enrichments.blank?

    accrediting_provider_enrichment = provider.accrediting_provider_enrichments
                                              .find do |provider|
      provider.UcasProviderCode == accrediting_provider.provider_code
    end

    accrediting_provider_enrichment.Description if accrediting_provider_enrichment.present?
  end
```
#### Pros

- No effort expended and other work can be prioritised

#### Cons

> - Eases the burden of onboarding developers

Author: I copy and pasted to the wrong section

- Leaves the data in an under constrained state
- Inefficient methods for querying entity relationships

### 2. Create typical self-join has_many through pivot table relationship

```ruby
class Provider < ApplicationRecord
  has_many :accredited_accreditations,
           class_name: 'ProviderAccreditation',
           foreign_key: :training_provider_id

  has_many :training_accreditations,
           class_name: 'ProviderAccreditation',
           foreign_key: :accredited_provider_id

  has_many :accredited_providers,
           through: :accredited_accreditations,
           source: :accredited_provider,
           class_name: 'Provider'

  has_many :training_providers,
           through: :training_accreditations,
           source: :training_provider,
           class_name: 'Provider'

class ProviderAccreditation < ApplicationRecord

```

#### Pros

- Query the training provider / accredited provider relationships through typical relational associations
- Index the columns used to make these queries.

> - More formally distinguish accredited and accrediting providers.

Author: I agree

- Database validations (if desired) on which accredited providers can accredit which courses.
- Opportunity to clarify definitions and understand how we are using them.

#### Cons

- None!

> ### 3. Replicate the Apply User / Provider Relationship model

Reviewer 2: The relationship model in Apply/Manage is complex partly because of safeguarding but also to define who can make application decisions.

Beyond the fundamental relationship (for example, X works with Y), I caution against a complex relationship model that may introduce a permissions model like Manage.

Here is some early work we did on permissions in Publish, which we ended up not using: 
- [Giving lead schools the ability to manage permissions for their accredited bodies](https://becoming-a-teacher.design-history.education.gov.uk/publish-teacher-training-courses/giving-lead-schools-the-ability-to-manage-permissions-for-their-accredited-bodies/)
- [Giving accredited bodies the ability to manage courses they ratify](https://becoming-a-teacher.design-history.education.gov.uk/publish-teacher-training-courses/giving-accredited-bodies-the-ability-to-manage-courses-they-ratify/)

And a related post [Managing accredited bodies if you’re a lead school](https://becoming-a-teacher.design-history.education.gov.uk/publish-teacher-training-courses/managing-accredited-bodies-if-youre-a-lead-school/) which includes changes that were implemented.

(NB. 'accredited body' and 'lead school' are outdated terms replaced by 'accredited provider' and 'lead partner' respectively.)

> ### 3. Replicate the Apply User / Provider Relationship model

Author: I suppose the Managing accredited bodies was done before the move to "ratifying provider" too.
